[LOGO WHOOSHING]
[CHIMES TINGLING]
[DRAMATIC MUSIC]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
How do we tap into
superconscious states
of awareness?
How does this really work?
The key to this is
in our mind and soul.
But it also involves being
able to consciously access more
of our full brain capacity.
Doing so requires that
we rewire our brain
for optimal
functioning and break
through limitations in our
previous neural conditioning.
In this episode,
we begin exploring
how to build
bridges and pathways
between our ordinary
consciousness and transcendent
states of superconscious
awareness.
We explored in season 1
how the universe consists
of a unified field of sentient
awareness and intelligence,
or as hermeticists
say, the all is mind.
Physicist Menas
Kafatos identifies
the sentient awareness as the
foundation of the universe.
It is the source of
information and energy
that gets transmitted
throughout the cosmos.
But like a fish whose whole life
has been lived in the water,
we may not have awareness
of the sea of consciousness
we are swimming in.
So how do we become aware?
First, we must
realize that sentience
is found at all levels, from
the subatomic to the cosmic.
This sentience is then organized
into systems of hierarchies.
On the most basic
end of the spectrum,
sentience means
something has the ability
to interact with
its environment,
receiving information and
responding to it in some way.
An example of this on
the subatomic level
is how quantum particles
interact with each other
through force carriers that
carry certain information.
All of this is governed by
and responsive to the laws
of physics.
As we move up the
spectrum of hierarchies
to more complex
forms of sentience,
we encounter various
minerals and crystals,
then single-celled organisms,
plants, animals, humans,
planetary systems, and
beyond, all the way
to the universal mind.
The cosmos consists
of the sum total
of all these nested
systems of sentience.
This perspective of
a sentient universe
challenges that
materialist perspective
which views the capacity
for consciousness
more as an epiphenomenon
of the brain.
They say that the material
or physical comes first,
and then consciousness
derives from it.
Now in the hermetic view,
where the all is mind,
well, mind is primary, while
the material world is simply
one macrosystem manifested
within the one mind.
Now, before we go any
further with this,
let's distinguish the difference
between two states of mind--
namely consciousness
and awareness.
Consciousness is about
awakened perception.
It is the goal of
our life experience,
while awareness here is
defined as the universal field
of intelligence and sentience.
Awareness-- we can think of it
more as an inner experience.
Like when we're coming
out of a sleep state
we start to wake up, but
our eyes are still closed.
At this point, we're self
aware, recognizing, I'm here.
I'm awake.
I am.
This moment is
like the I am state
of awareness at the top
of the Tree of Life--
that first emanation
from the source.
, it is the center of being now.
As soon as we open
our eyes, we become
conscious of the things
that are outside of us--
our environment and our ability
to expand and express ourselves
into the outer.
When awake, we can
take in information
from our surroundings and from
other forms of intelligence
and the various stimuli that are
coming in to us from outside.
This is consciousness.
It is that more active
experience with our eyes open.
Consciousness is a state of
being fully awake and aware.
We might compare it to
the beta gamma brainwave
states that allow us to be
aware of self and others.
But awareness itself is the
foundation to consciousness.
It is more like the alpha
theta brainwave states
of inward experience.
How do we begin
optimizing our brain?
Well, it begins with making
the correct connections
or bridges between our brain,
our mind, and the one mind.
When we can strengthen and
solidify these connections
by stimulating our brain
and neurological system
with the proper
vibrational energies--
these can include energies such
as light, sound, touch, breath,
aromas, all tuned in to
the correct frequencies.
Through this journey,
we'll explore
seven bridges or connective
circuits between our brain
regions and various
levels of consciousness.
The goal of this
exploration is to forge
a path that leads us from our
regular experience of life
back to the feeling of oneness
with universal consciousness.
The first bridge on this
journey begins with our mind.
What is the mind?
And how is it connected
to consciousness
and our brain-body system?
The mind is a complex framework
of thoughts and emotions
that directly interface
with the brain-body system.
But first, it connects
in and through our soul.
The primary function of the mind
is to become aware of stimulus
coming in from spirit
or from the one mind,
and then to direct our actions
according to intention.
The mind has different
levels to it,
and so to make it
easy for us here,
let's just try to call them the
lower mind and the higher mind.
The lower mind is programmed
through life experiences.
It is influenced by our
education, our expectations,
desires, habits, belief systems,
and emotional attachments.
It forms part of
our personality,
which is the mask we identify
with in our outer life.
Now, the higher mind,
on the other hand,
is influenced directly
by spirit, or true self.
It communicates to us
through subtle energies
of our inner world.
We tap into these in meditation
and through intuition
or a sense of purpose,
meaning, and potential.
Our higher mind is part of
our original patterning,
our spiritual blueprint.
This blueprint contains
our purpose, our contracts,
and our whole reason
for being here.
Now, these two
levels of our mind--
higher and lower--
they help us to operate
within this physical
density, and also
to connect with
our eternal spirit.
We can represent them
on the Tree of Life
as the lower two triads.
The physical body is
at the very bottom
of the tree, the bottom sphere.
The lower mind is the
lowest of the three triads.
The higher mind is what
we call the middle triad,
while the spirit
is the upper triad.
In addition to this arrangement
on the Tree of Life,
where is our mind located?
If it's on the Tree
of Life, that also
means it is in our
physical and spiritual DNA.
It's in every cell of the
body, not just the brain.
But it's not only
the physical body.
The mind extends beyond the body
and reaches out to the infinite
to touch the one mind.
Let's try to make this
more relatable, here.
A helpful analogy
for understanding
this dynamic system is that of
a radio broadcasting analogy.
Instead of a sea of
interacting waves,
think now of how radio stations
are broadcasting their signals
out to the field around them.
There are many
radio stations that
can be tuned into from a
single receiver or radio plate.
That's because
they each broadcast
a slightly different frequency
in the radio wave range.
If we're driving in our car
and listening to the radio,
we know we can always change
to a different station
if we don't like what
we're listening to.
What that means is
that we're moving
through a sea of radio
signals, all being
broadcast from
different locations
and at different frequencies.
In this analogy, our
car represents our body,
while the radio receiver
is like our brain,
meaning it's the hardware.
The broadcasting stations
are like the centers
of spirit awareness
that are sending out
their ripples or
waves of information
within the mind of the all.
Individuated mind, like
our mind that we normally
associate with, is the waves
themselves, or each radio
signal being sent out.
Our mind thus functions as
a field of communication
between the spirit and
the brain-body system.
This communication flow
can also go both ways,
because in our case, the
body and physical world
can also send signals and
information back to the spirit,
this makes the brain-body
system more of a receiver
and transducer of m rather than
a generator of consciousness.
The mind, on the other hand,
not only transmits information--
it can also analyze and
interpret those signals
and respond back
to them according
to its mental framework
or programming.
The brain receives signals from
spirit and the collective mind,
but it is our individual
mind that is processing
and interpreting those signals.
While the brain is
the hardware, our mind
is like the software or
the operating system.
In order to optimize
this system,
let's take a closer look
at how it functions.
It begins with a stimulus.
That stimulus comes in from
spirit, which we can also
call light, love, or will.
When that stimulus
enters our field,
it is registered by our senses--
either internal, intuitive
or external, physical senses.
This then triggers
the nervous system,
and it creates a feeling--
a physical body sensation.
This sensation within
the body triggers
our wants and desires, which
then leads to a thought.
And this thought
becomes an action,
which is then fed
back into the cycle,
creating a feedback loop.
This whole process is
the engine of the mind.
This is the operating system.
Through understanding
Kabbalah and the Tree of Life,
we can better
understand this process
and recognize it as a
cycle or feedback loop.
If we're not functioning
as we would like to,
we can interrupt the cycle
and reprogram our mind
for more positive
results, interrupting
negative or destructive
self-sabotaging patterns
in order to bring ourselves
to higher mind and higher will
in order to function
better in this vehicle.
While scientists have
attempted to connect the mind
to the brain, the Tree of Life
reveals that the mind is truly
everywhere.
It is infinite.
This pattern is
seen at all scales.
Remember, we are
infinite beings,
and we have traveled
through the cosmos already.
So the experiences of our
higher mind are pretty vast.
Our mind brings awareness
and intelligence from spirit,
connecting us to the one mind--
the mind of the Ein
Sof, or source, which
is that quiet pond or sea.
The quiet pond is a
metaphor for the zero point
field, the ground state--
that body of water that
is completely still
and as reflective as glass.
But to really understand
this, let's dive
a little deeper into
the quantum pond analogy
and see what else it can reveal
about how our mind works.
Ripples or fluctuations
on the pond
bring up a state of awareness.
What we can call our
individuated mind
and consciousness could be
thought of as a grouping
of waves on the ocean.
It's a wave, but
within that wave,
there are fluctuations
and structure.
In quantum physics, we
call this a wave packet.
This wave packet maintains
its own structure and sense
of identity, but it is
still part of the ocean.
If we look at a wave packet,
imagine one big wave crest,
and within that crest is a
modulation of other smaller
waves.
There is an overall shape
or frequency to the crest,
but inside that is all kinds
of other super positions
or smaller wave packets.
And those are different
frequency levels,
all combining together
to give a complex wave.
The big shape of the wave
packet-- that big envelope--
is more like our pure awareness.
It's the foundation.
And inside of that, all
that smaller, more complex
wave patterning, this
is more like the states
of consciousness and the
different levels of frequency
that our consciousness
can attain.
So the wave packet of
the individuated mind
is both mind and consciousness.
Within that, we have the
two states of awareness--
the overall wave packet--
and consciousness--
the structure
of all those different frequency
levels coming together.
This wave packet of
awareness travels, ,
then through the
mind of the all,
through that infinite sea
of the Ein Sof, the source,
the quantum field.
And it interacts
with other waves,
meaning other consciousnesses
or individuated beings.
Yet we are all one.
We're all part of the sea.
This is how we're all
connected, and yet experience
different individuated
awarenesses.
Let's go back for a moment to
the higher mind and lower mind
and bring this back to us.
Gaining awareness of
these two levels of mind
and how they
function in our lives
is a key to operating this
vehicle of the mind for a more
conscious level.
We can think of the higher
mind as the higher frequency
aspects of the wave
and the lower mind
as the lower frequency aspects
within that wave packet.
In many ways, the
lower frequencies
can seem to actually
dominate in terms
of our waking consciousness.
These lower frequencies
are influenced
more by our experiences
in the world,
through our education,
indoctrinations,
emotional attachments,
and personality.
But as we tune into
the higher frequencies
we can access the more
subtle yet potent details
and fine structure
of that wave packet.
The levels of the mind all
deal with our sense of self
in relation to everything else.
Now, what we see on
the Tree of Life--
there are three spheres
that relate to the higher
mind and three
spheres of operating
in relation to the lower mind.
Let's break this
down even further
and see what those
interactions of each
of these spheres on the Tree
of Life really reveal to us.
Our lower mind
corresponds to the triad
of Yesod, Hod, and Netsah.
Yesod, which means foundation,
is our subconscious.
It's influenced by our
habits and unresolved issues
of the past that
have been buried.
Hod, on the other
hand, means glory.
It is our rational mind
which discerns and judges.
It reasons.
Netsah, which
translates as victory,
relates to emotion,
intuition, and creativity.
All of these aspects
here just mentioned
on this part of the tree help
to develop our personality.
They are our filters--
our perceptions.
The higher mind,
on the other hand,
corresponds to
that middle triad.
And these spheres are
Tif'Eret, Gevurah, and Hesed.
Tif'Eret means beauty, and
this would be connection
to our higher self--
kindness, connection
to the heart,
a sense of beauty in all
things, love for ourselves.
This is our higher self from
an inner plane connection.
Gevurah, which means
severity, would be more
the higher functions
of discernment
and really being strong in
our sense of empowerment
and knowing our power.
Gevurah is like having
the courage to express
and also creating that proper
boundary and a way of relating
to others.
Hesed, on the other
hand, is about mercy,
and this would be more of
the higher faculties of love
for all, greater
capacity for compassion,
altruism, service-oriented
leadership.
When this triad of the higher
mind is really working well,
it is an embodiment of
servant leadership--
someone who's truly
devoted to a higher
cause, and inspiring and
uniting others in that mission.
Through the Tree
of Life, we can see
how our higher mind and
our lower mind operate.
And working with the Tree
of Life and Kabbalah,
we can reprogram
our mind to optimize
the functioning of this
vehicle and each sphere
that relates to the
different aspects of mind.
This truly awakens
us to our higher will
and helps us to
follow our spirit
and where it desires us to go.
How do we rewire and
attune this system?
The process to rewire
and strengthen our system
can be compared to the analogy
of tuning into different radio
stations.
If we want to listen
to classical music,
we're going to charge
the appropriate station
on the radio dial.
But if we want to
listen to rock music,
we need to turn to
a different station.
If we're looking for
traffic or weather,
we might switch
to an AM frequency
instead of the FM dial.
The decision to listen to a
certain station is a choice.
We use our intention to
shift our system to tune
in to that desired frequency.
So intention here
is truly the key
to bridging from
our daily awareness
to our higher consciousness.
This is what really helps us
tune into the desired radio
station of the mind.
Setting intention is
the thought process,
and we act according to our
own will to turn the dial,
so to speak.
So within this radio analogy,
the signals of the mine field
are like the
specific frequencies
within the
electromagnetic spectrum--
a form of vibrational energy
in the radio wave range.
They exist virtually everywhere,
and we are constantly
receiving these signals
even if we're not
tuned in and aware of them.
Altogether, we form a complex
and interconnected wholeness,
bridging from the densest
levels of physicality
all the way to the
infinite expanse
of universal consciousness.
We are one whole, yet
we often believe or act
as if we're just a
separate part struggling
to survive in a harsh world
The biggest rifts we must bridge
are the places in our system
that cause us to perceive
ourselves and others as
separate.
Perhaps these perceptions
of separation--
maybe there are consequences
of complementarity
that allow us to observe
and distinguish experiences
in the physical life.
But when those
perceived separations
are mistaken as real, the
rifts in our mind expand.
These misperceptions
are the result
of faulty programming
in the mind
and hardwiring in the brain.
We see, for example, how
open children and babies are.
They seem to have no sense
of separation or limitation.
But then, by around
the age of six,
we start coming into
the age of reasoning.
And through indoctrination
and social filters,
the rift begins to expand.
In our effort now to bridge
back to our sense of wholeness
and connection to
the infinite self,
we must address our
current framework,
which often blocks us from
perceiving our connection
to the greater cosmos.
To do this, we begin
with our intention.
Intention initiates
the choice to build
the bridge between
our awareness and
the universal consciousness.
Intention alone,
however, is not enough.
For change to take place,
we need to take action.
Conscious change requires us
to have the knowledge of what
actions to take that
will successfully
lead to our desired change.
We also need the commitment
to take the necessary steps
and retrain our system
for more expanded states
of consciousness.
The blocks within
the system are due
to the inner and
outer perceptions.
And our perceptions
are influenced
both by our mental and
physical programming.
In order to better understand
how our perceptions work
and how to rewire
our system, let's
take a look at how the
nervous system receives
signals and processes and
prioritizes that information.
Our nervous system's
spine and primitive brain
are some of the earliest
systems to begin development
within the embryo,
and they are also
the last to be
completed after birth.
The development
of our neocortex,
our most human
part of the brain,
continues into early adulthood.
And throughout our life,
we have the ability
to re-mold and re-pattern
our brains' wiring.
Our brain itself
is an intricately
arranged system of neurons and
glial cells and biochemicals.
The majority of the
neurons within the brain
are actually formed
before birth.
And as the brain
develops in utero,
it forms three primary systems,
each building one on top
of the other.
Evolution has
optimized this process
for higher levels
of functioning.
And these systems build
from the bottom up
and then move from
the back to the front.
The first three systems are the
old brain, the limbic system,
and the neocortex.
What are these three systems?
Well, let's start
with the old brain.
The old brain starts developing
three weeks after conception,
and it primarily develops
during the second trimester
of pregnancy, continuing,
though, through age 1
after birth.
The structures
within the old brain
include the hindbrain, which
is composed of the brain
stem, the pons, the medulla
oblongata, and the cerebellum,
as well as the
midbrain, which is
related to our sense
of touch and balance.
The next system building off of
the foundation of the old brain
is the limbic system,
which primarily develops
as toddlers up to the age of 5.
This is the functioning
of our reward centers--
the fight or flight
response as well.
The structures within
the limbic system
include the thalamus, the
hypothalamus, the hippocampus,
the amygdala, and
the basal ganglia.
The limbic system relates mostly
to our emotions, our long term
memory, spatial
mapping, and it's also
related to our sense
of hearing and smell.
As we move higher, then,
into the neocortex, this area
is primarily developed
during childhood,
with the right hemisphere
dominating development
between the ages of 4 to 7
years old, and then synthesizing
the right and left hemispheres
from the age of 7 to 11 years
old.
The neocortex is fully developed
by around the age 15 years old.
The primary structures
within the neocortex
are the left and right
hemispheres of the cerebrum.
These include the frontal,
temporal, parietal,
and occipital lobes.
This area of the brain
is related to our sense
of vision and hearing.
It relates to our imagination
memory, attention,
language capacities, perceptual
awareness, spatial reasoning,
and motor commands.
After birth, the fourth system--
the prefrontal cortex
at the very forehead--
begins to rapidly develop.
This is the part of the brain
that makes us the most human.
It is our executive
control center,
and it is responsible
for decision
making, planning-- it
helps form our personality
and our expression.
This prefrontal cortex
is what orchestrates
the leadership over the other
three systems of the brain--
at least, that's
what's intended.
This foremost part of
the brain is actually
the last to develop
after birth, and it
continues developing all
the way up to about age 25.
Beyond these four
brain systems, science
is now also beginning
to realize that we
have two other very
important systems that
are part of the nervous
system and the brain.
And these two parts include
the heart and the gut.
The heart influences
the functions
of the brain in
significant ways,
maintaining a two-way
communication between the heart
and the brain.
And the heart is constantly
sending signals to the brain.
It communicates through
the nerve cells,
through hormones,
through pressure waves,
and through the heart's
massive electromagnetic field.
As the rhythms of the
heart become more coherent,
we experience shifts in
our perception, increased
mental clarity, and heightened
intuitive awareness.
The deepest part of
this system is the gut,
and it also contains over
100 million nerve cells,
forming what scientists now
call an enteric nervous system.
An imbalance in the gut has
been connected to things
like anxiety and
depression, affecting
our mood, our cognition,
and our behaviors.
Studies show that relaxation
techniques such as meditation
and yoga help to relieve
gut-related imbalances.
It is clear that our
brain-body system
is more than just
the sum of its parts.
It is operating as a complex
and interconnected system.
As we see from this journey
through the fetal development,
not only does the brain
develop from the bottom up,
but MRI studies have also
shown that it then moves
from the back to the front.
But why is this important
for us to understand?
Well, we have to know
how the brain was
built in order to work our
way back to the foundations.
We tend to have more
conscious awareness
of the prefrontal cortex
and the neocortex,
while the deeper brain
and the limbic system
are usually operating
subconsciously or
unconsciously.
As we embark on
rewiring our brain,
we begin working our
way from the front
backwards and then
down, starting
where we can create
this intention
from a conscious level, and
then working our way back
to the deeper
foundations of the brain.
And while we may be able to
compare parts of the brain
to different
developmental stages,
this is a very simplified model.
The brain itself is not
composed of separate parts,
but it functions in
a very connected way.
The average neuron has anywhere
between 1,000 to 10,000
synaptic connections.
And beyond this, there are
biochemical communications
between the brain and
the rest of the body
through neuropeptides
and hormones
and the endocrine glands.
This inter-system
connectivity provides us
the framework to enhance the
connectivity of the brain.
To bring our waking
consciousness
into a more transcendent
state of awareness,
we must become more conscious
of the whole brain function.
In an ideal situation,
if everything goes well
during the brain's development,
and if everything is
operating in perfect harmony--
we have built those
proper connections
through our growth--
we should be almost
like super humans
by the time we're in our 20s.
So what went wrong?
Well, typically, there are
breakdowns that happen.
We experience
improper programming
during the developmental stages.
There's emotional and mental
attachments that can come in.
And while the evolutionary
pattern guided our brain
development from the
bottom up, it often
did so in a chaotic
and stochastic way.
We experienced trauma,
and faulty inputs,
leading to bad habits,
and as a result,
the bridges between
the different systems
are incomplete.
There's connections that
are missing and damaged
through this process.
Now, if all really does
go well, the brain systems
build in succession through
the developmental stages
with the proper
connections forming
at each phase of development.
Fully integrating
these brain systems
gives us huge potential
to learn, adapt,
and go beyond limitations.
But when those communications
and proper linking break down,
we become our own worst enemy.
We fall into
self-sabotage patterns.
We get caught up in
limited thinking,
and we have loads of
emotional baggage.
And our task is now to
consciously repair the system
so that we can access all
of our potential and optimal
functioning.
The Tree of Life
provides the map
showing us the pattern and how
to bring this intricate system
into balance.
We can relate these levels of
development to the pathways
on the Tree of Life and
retrace our way back
through the
evolutionary process,
building a more conscious
and connected system
that allows for optimal
functioning and expanded
states of consciousness.
So are we doomed to
our previous wiring
and all the faulty programming?
Fortunately, no.
Because of the
neuroplasticity of the brain,
we have the ability to
rewire and strengthen
these faulty connections,
and we can do this
through our spiritual practice,
through our lifestyle choices,
and through a
willingness to let go
of our emotional attachments.
This rewiring
process is only going
to happen through us
making the right choices
and taking the right actions.
And for this, our attitude
and our ways of thinking
are 95% of the battle of what
determines our ability to truly
rewire the brain-body system.
So how do we start this process?
Well, the first step to
start reprogramming the brain
is to bring our sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous systems
into balance.
If we're in overdrive
all the time,
we're not going to allow
any rewiring to happen.
We need to start first
by relaxing the body,
focusing on the breath,
relaxing the muscles,
emptying your mind
of any thoughts.
One exercise to work with is
to practice tuning your radio
dial into connecting to the
universal consciousness.
We do this by tuning to the zero
point field, or the quiet pond.
This can be done with
a simple visualization
to bring your mind
into the state.
So to begin, close your eyes
and take a few deep breaths,
imagining the ocean, the
universal sea of consciousness.
See the waves.
Visualize and sense and
begin to imagine yourself
as a part of these waves,
and then sink deeper
into the ocean.
Sink below the waves, becoming
a part of the ocean depth.
The deeper you sink
into the ocean,
also bring the ocean
into stillness.
Begin to connect
to the background
of stillness within the ocean.
As we connect into
that stillness,
it helps us to relax, to
surrender, and to normalize
to ground state.
Practicing meditation every
day by bringing the mind
into that state of
stillness is a powerful tool
to start building
this first bridge.
We'll continue building
off of this foundation
in other episodes, working
our way through each system
of the brain and body.
Each new bridge we build
is retracing the steps
of our brain's development
to repair and enhance
the connections of
our brain regions.
For more optimal
functioning, join me again
as we discover more practical
tools for rewiring our brain.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of our human potential with
me in this episode of "Mystery
Teachings."
[DRAMATIC MUSIC]